*Microbial genomics, Functional annotation, Day 1*

Introduction about functional annotation
===

In the previous module, you worked with genome assemblies, RNAseq reads and gene predictions of *Zymoseptoria tritici*. The next step towards **understanding the biology** of *Z. tritici* using a genomic approach is to **predict the function of the proteins encoded by the genes**. Assigning functions to proteins allows predicting specific biological features of an organism, such as the ability to grow on specific substrates or to produce bioactive compounds. Thus, such *in silico* functional annotation is the pre-requisite to making hypotheses to test in the laboratory.

A functional annotation is performed using protein sequences: **using accurate gene predictions is crucial!**

To predict protein functions, three major *in silico* homology-based approaches are employed: sequence similarity search, conserved domains prediction, pattern identification. A plethora of bioinformatics tools and databases is available, and this number can be overwhelming. To find and use the right tools for functional annotation, it is important to remember basic knowledge in cellular and molecular biology. It is also very important for understanding the predictions generated by these tools. In general, functional annotations are used to answer specific questions related to particular biological processes in the organism of interest. For this reason, it is important to know the biological specificities of the organism of interest, and it means that only a limited number of tools can be employed to generate the needed functional annotation. However, tools were developed to easily combine several tools which correspond to a minimum functional annotation workflow that could be used by default.

** **

**A complete functional annotation tool: Funannotate**

> Palmer J (2017) Funannotate: Fungal genome annotation scripts. https://github.com/nextgenusfs/funannotate \
Take a few minutes to check this tool and understand what it does
https://funannotate.readthedocs.io

** **

While tools exist to automatically generate comprehensive functional annotations of predicted proteomes (like the Funannotate pipeline), it is of primary importance to **understand how these tools work, how to use them, and what are their limitations**. Most of these tools require to use arguments that will affect the results and it is therefore important to understand them. Thus, today, you will use a few tools which are commonly employed to annotate the function of proteins and you will try to assess their limitations.

Typically, functional annotations for a given genome are stored in a single tabular text file in which each row is a gene and each column contains the result of a tool.

To perform the functional annotation of *Z. tritici*, you will use a fasta file that contains a subset of the predicted proteome of *Z. tritici* available on the server **(~/data/fungalgenomics\_collemare/day1/Mycgr3.30proteins.fasta**) because analysis of a complete proteome may take several hours with certain tools. For each analysis, you will generate an output file that you will analyse (output will be text files that can be opened in any text or spreadsheet editor).

In each exercise, you will be asked to format the output results in order to build such an annotation file in a tabular format.
